<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>When Khaled reached the palace he dismounted from his mare, and leading her by the bridle entered the gateway. Here he met many persons, guards, and slaves both black and white, and porters bearing provisions, and a few women, all hurrying hither and thither; and many noticed him, but a few gazed curiously into his face, and two or three grooms followed him a little way, pointing out to each other the beauties of his mare.</p>
			<p>“Truly,” they said, “if we did not know the mares of the stud better than the faces of our mothers, we should swear by Allah that this beast had been stolen from the Sultan’s stables by a thief in the night, for she is of the best blood in Nejed.”</p>
			<p>These being curious they saluted Khaled and asked him whence he came and whither he was going, seeing that it is not courteous to ask a stranger any other questions.</p>
			<p>“I come from the Red Desert,” Khaled answered, “and I am going into the palace as you see.”</p>
			<p>The grooms saw that there was a rebuke in the last part of his answer and hung back and presently went their way.</p>
			<p>“Are such mares bred in the Red Desert?” they exclaimed. “The stranger is doubtless the sheikh of some powerful tribe. But if this be true, where are the men that came with him? And why is he dressed like a man of the city?”</p>
			<p>So they hastened out of the gateway to find the Bedouins who, they supposed, must have accompanied Khaled on his journey.</p>
			<p>But Khaled went forward and came to a great court in which were stone seats by the walls. Here a number of people were waiting. So he sat down upon one of the seats and his mare laid her nose upon his shoulder as though inquiring what he would do.</p>
			<p>“Allah knows,” Khaled said, as though answering her. So he waited patiently.</p>
			<p>At last a man came out into the courtyard who was richly dressed, and whom all the people saluted as he passed. But he came straight towards Khaled, who rose from his seat.</p>
			<p>“Whence come you, my friend?” he inquired after they had exchanged the salutation.</p>
			<p>“From the Red Desert, and I desire permission to speak with the Sultan when it shall please his majesty to see me.”</p>
			<p>“And what do you desire of his majesty? I ask that I may inform him beforehand. So you will have a better reception.”</p>
			<p>“Tell the Sultan,” said Khaled, “that a man is here who has neither father nor mother nor any possessions beyond a swift mare, a keen sword and a strong hand, but who is come nevertheless to ask in marriage Zehowah, the Sultan’s daughter.”</p>
			<p>The minister smiled and gazed at Khaled in silence for a moment, but when he had looked keenly at his face, he became grave.</p>
			<p>“It may be,” he thought, “that this is some great prince who comes thus simply as in a disguise, and it were best not to anger him.”</p>
			<p>“I will deliver your message,” he answered aloud, “though it is a strange one. It is customary for those who come to ask for a maiden in marriage to bring gifts⁠—and to receive others in return,” he added.</p>
			<p>“I neither bring gifts nor ask any,” said Khaled. “Allah is great and will provide me with what I need.”</p>
			<p>“I fear that he will not provide you with the Sultan’s daughter for a wife,” said the minister as he went away, but Khaled did not hear the words, though he would have cared little if he had.</p>
			<p>Now it chanced that Zehowah was sitting in a balcony surrounded with lattice, over the courtyard, on that morning and she had seen Khaled enter, leading his mare by the bridle. But though she watched the stranger and his beast idly for some time she thought as little of the one as of the other, for her heart was not turned to love, and she knew nothing of horses. But her women thought differently and spoke loudly, praising the beauty of both.</p>
			<p>“There is indeed a warrior able to fight in the front of our armies,” they said. “Truly such a man must have been Khaled ibn Walad, the Sword of the Lord, in the days of the Prophet⁠—upon whom peace.”</p>
			<p>By and by there was a cry that the Sultan was coming into the room, and the women rose and retired. The Sultan sat down upon the carpet by his daughter, in the balcony.</p>
			<p>“Do you see that stranger, holding a beautiful mare by the bridle?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I see him,” answered Zehowah indifferently.</p>
			<p>“He is come to ask you in marriage.”</p>
			<p>“Another!” she exclaimed with a careless laugh. “If it is the will of Allah I will marry him. If not, he will go away like the rest.”</p>
			<p>“This man is not like the rest, my daughter. He is either a madman or some powerful prince in disguise.”</p>
			<p>“Or both, perhaps,” laughed Zehowah. She laughed often, for although she was not inclined to love, she was of a gentle and merry temper.</p>
			<p>“His message was a strange one,” said the Sultan. “He says that he neither brings gifts nor asks them, that he has neither father nor mother, nor any possessions excepting a swift mare, a keen sword and a strong hand.”</p>
			<p>“I see the mare, the sword and the hand,” answered Zehowah. “But the hand is like any other hand⁠—how can I tell whether it be strong? The sword is in its sheath, and I cannot see its edge, and though the mare is pretty enough, I have seen many of your own I liked as well. The elephants of the Indian prince were more amusing, and the prince himself was more beautiful than this stranger with his black beard and his solemn face.”</p>
			<p>“That is true,” said the Sultan with a sigh.</p>
			<p>“Do you wish me to marry this man?” Zehowah asked.</p>
			<p>“My daughter, I wish you to choose of your own free will. Nevertheless I trust that you will choose before long, that I may see my child’s children before I die.”</p>
			<p>For the Sultan was old and white-bearded, and was already somewhat bowed with advancing years and with burden of many cares and the fatigues of many wars. Yet his eye was bright and his heart fearless still, though his judgment was often weak and vacillating.</p>
			<p>“Do you wish me to marry this man?” Zehowah asked again. “He will be a strange husband, for he is a strange suitor, coming without gifts and having neither father nor mother. But I will do as you command. If you leave it to me I shall never marry.”</p>
			<p>“I did not say that I desired you to take this one especially,” protested the Sultan, “though for the matter of gifts I care little, since heaven has sent me wealth in abundance. But my remaining years are few, and the years of life are like stones slipping from a mountain which move slowly at first, and then faster until they outrun the lightning and leap into the dark valley below. And what is required of a husband is that he be a true believer, young and whole in every part, and of a charitable disposition.”</p>
			<p>“Truly,” laughed Zehowah, “if he have no possessions, charity will avail him little, since he has nothing to give.”</p>
			<p>“There is other charity besides the giving of alms, my daughter, since it is charity even to think charitably of others, as you know. But I have not said that you should marry this man, for you are free. And indeed I have not yet talked with him. But I have sent for him and you shall hear him speak. See⁠—they are just now conducting him to the hall of audiences. But indeed I think he is no husband for you, after all.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan rose and went to receive Khaled, and Zehowah went to the secret window above her father’s raised seat in the hall.</p>
			<p>Khaled made the customary salutation with the greatest respect, and the Sultan made him sit down at his right hand as though he had been a prince, and asked him whence he had come. Then a refreshment was brought, and Khaled ate and drank a little, after which the Sultan inquired his business.</p>
			<p>“I come,” said Khaled boldly, “to ask your daughter Zehowah in marriage. I bring no gifts, for I have none to offer, nor have I any inheritance. My mare is my fortune, my sword is my argument and my wit is in my arm.”</p>
			<p>“You are a strange suitor,” said the Sultan; but he kept a pleasant countenance, since Khaled was his guest. “You are no doubt the sheikh of a tribe of the Red Desert, though I was not aware that any tribes dwelt there.”</p>
			<p>“So far as being the sheikh of my tribe,” said Khaled with a smile, “your majesty may call me so, for my tribe consists of myself alone, seeing that I have neither father nor mother nor any relations.”</p>
			<p>“Truly, I have never talked with such a suitor before,” answered the Sultan. “At least I presume that you are a son of some prince, and that you have chosen to disguise yourself as a rich traveller and to hide your history under an allegory.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan would certainly not have allowed himself to overstep the bounds of courtesy so far, but for his astonishment at Khaled’s daring manner. He was too keen, however, not to see that this man was something above the ordinary and that, whatever else he might be, he was not a common impostor. Such a fellow would have found means to rob a caravan of valuable goods, to offer as gifts, would have brought himself a train of camels and slaves and would have given himself out as a prince of some distant country from which it would not be possible to obtain information.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ar">Istaghfir Allah!</i> I am no prince,” Khaled answered. “I ask for the hand of your daughter. The will of Allah will be accomplished.”</p>
			<p>He knew that Zehowah was watching and listening behind the lattice in her place of concealment, for the memory of such things had not been taken from him when he had lost the supernatural vision of the genii and had become an ordinary man. He was determined therefore to be truthful and to say nothing which he might afterwards be called upon to explain. For he never doubted but that Zehowah would be his wife, since the angel had told him that it should be so.</p>
			<p>“And what if I refuse even to consider your proposal?” inquired the Sultan, to see what he would say.</p>
			<p>“If it is the will of Allah that I marry your daughter, your refusal would be useless, but if it is not his will, your refusal would be altogether unnecessary.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan was much struck by this argument which showed a ready wit in the stranger and which he could only have opposed by asserting that his own will was superior to that of heaven itself.</p>
			<p>“But,” said he, defending himself, “any of the previous suitors might have said the same.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly,” replied Khaled, unabashed. “But they did not say it. Your majesty will certainly now consider the matter.”</p>
			<p>“In the meanwhile,” the Sultan answered, very graciously, “you are my guest, and you have come in time to take part in the third day of the feast, to which you are welcome in the name of Allah, the merciful.”</p>
			<p>Thereupon the Sultan rose and Khaled was conducted to the apartments set apart for the guests. But the Sultan returned to the harem in a very thoughtful mood, and before long he found Zehowah who had returned to her seat in the balcony.</p>
			<p>“This is a very strange suitor,” he said, shaking his head and looking into his daughter’s face.</p>
			<p>“He is at least bold and outspoken,” she answered. “He makes no secret of his poverty nor of his wishes. Whatever he be, he is in earnest and speaks truth. I would like well to know the only secret which he wishes to keep⁠—who he really is.”</p>
			<p>“It may be,” said the Sultan thoughtfully, “that if I threaten to cut off his head he will tell us. But on the other hand, he is a guest.”</p>
			<p>“He is not of those who are easily terrified, I think. Tell me, my father, do you wish me to marry him?”</p>
			<p>“How could you marry a man who has no family and no inheritance? Would such a marriage befit the daughter of kings?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked Zehowah with much calmness.</p>
			<p>The Sultan stared at her in astonishment.</p>
			<p>“Has this stranger enchanted your imagination?” he inquired by way of answer.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Zehowah scornfully. “I have seen the noblest, the most beautiful and the richest of the Earth, ready to take me to wife, and I have not loved. Shall I love an outcast?”</p>
			<p>“Then how can you ask my wishes?”</p>
			<p>“Because there are good reasons why I should marry this man.”</p>
			<p>“Good reasons? In the name of Allah let me hear them, if there are any.”</p>
			<p>“You are old, my father,” said Zehowah, “and it has not pleased heaven to send you a son, nor to leave you any living relation to sit upon the throne when your years are accomplished. You must needs think of your successor.”</p>
			<p>“The better reason for choosing some powerful prince, whose territory shall increase the kingdom he inherits from me, and whose alliance shall strengthen the empire I leave behind me.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ar">Istaghfir Allah!</i> The worse reason. For such a prince would be attached to his own country, and would take me thither with him and would neglect the kingdom of Nejed, regarding it as a land of strangers whom he may oppress with taxes to increase his own splendour. And this is not unreasonable, since no king can wisely govern two kingdoms separated from each other by more than three days’ journey. No man can have other than the one of two reasons for asking me in marriage. Either he has heard of me and desires to possess me, or he wishes to increase his dominions by the inheritance which will be mine.”</p>
			<p>“Doubtless, this is the truth,” said the Sultan. “But so much the more does this stranger in all probability covet my kingdom, since he has nothing of his own.”</p>
			<p>“This is what I mean. For, having no other possessions to distract his attention, he will remain always here, and will govern your kingdom for its own advantage in order that it may profit himself.”</p>
			<p>“This is a subtle argument, my daughter, and one requiring consideration.”</p>
			<p>“The more so because the man seems otherwise well fitted to be my husband, since he is a true believer, and young, and fearless and outspoken.”</p>
			<p>“But if this is all,” objected the Sultan, “there are in Nejed several young men, sons of my chief courtiers, who possess the same qualifications. Choose one of them.”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary, to choose one of them would arouse the jealousy of all the rest, with their families and slaves and freedmen, whereby the kingdom would easily be exposed to civil war. But if I take a stranger it is more probable that all will be for him, since you are beloved, and there is no reason why one party should oppose him and another support him, since none of them know anything of him.”</p>
			<p>“But he will not be beloved by the people unless he is liberal, and he has nothing wherewith to be generous.”</p>
			<p>“And where are the treasures of Riad?” laughed Zehowah. “Is it not easy for you to go secretly to his chamber and to give him as much gold as he needs?”</p>
			<p>“That is also true. I see that you have set your heart upon him.”</p>
			<p>“Not my heart, my father, but my head. For I have infinitely more head than heart, and I see that the welfare of the kingdom will be better secured with such a ruler, than it would have been under a foreign prince whose right hand would be perpetually thrust out to take in Nejed that which his left hand would throw to courtiers in his own country. Do I speak wisdom or folly?”</p>
			<p>“It is neither all folly nor all wisdom.”</p>
			<p>“I have seen this man, I have heard him speak,” said Zehowah. “He is as well as another since I must marry sooner or later. Moreover I have another argument.”</p>
			<p>“What is that?”</p>
			<p>“Either he is a man strong enough to rule me, or he is not,” Zehowah answered with a laugh. “If he can govern me, he can govern the kingdom of Nejed. But if not I will govern it for him, and rule him also.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan looked up to heaven and slightly raised his hands from his knees.</p>
			<p>“Allah is merciful and forgiving!” he exclaimed. “Is this the spirit befitting a wife?”</p>
			<p>“Is it charity to cause happiness?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly it is charity.”</p>
			<p>“And which is greater, the happiness of many or the happiness of one?”</p>
			<p>“The happiness of many is greater,” answered the Sultan. “What then?” he asked after a time, seeing that she said nothing more.</p>
			<p>“I have spoken,” she replied. “It is best that I should marry him.”</p>
			<p>Then there was silence for a long time, during which the Sultan sat quite motionless in his place, watching his daughter, while she looked idly through the lattice at the people who came and went in the court below. She seemed to feel no emotion.</p>
			<p>The Sultan did not know how to oppose Zehowah’s will any more than he could answer her arguments, although his worldly wisdom was altogether at variance with her decision. For she was the beloved child of his old age and he could refuse her nothing. Moreover, in what she had said, there was much which recommended itself to his judgment, though by no means enough to persuade him. At last he rose from the carpet and embraced her.</p>
			<p>“If it is your will, let it be so,” he said.</p>
			<p>“It is the will of Allah,” answered Zehowah. “Let it be accomplished immediately.”</p>
			<p>With a sigh the Sultan withdrew and sent a messenger to Khaled requesting him to come to another and more secluded chamber, where they could be alone and talk freely.</p>
			<p>Khaled showed no surprise on hearing that his suit was accepted, but he thought it fitting to express much gratitude for the favourable decision. Then the Sultan, who did not wish to seem too readily yielding, began to explain to Khaled Zehowah’s reasons for accepting a poor stranger, presenting them as though they were his own.</p>
			<p>“For,” he said, “whatever you may in reality be, you have chosen to present yourself to us in such a manner as would not have failed to bring about a refusal under any other circumstances. But I have considered that as it will be your destiny, if heaven grants you life, to rule my kingdom after me, you will in all likelihood rule it more wisely and carefully, for having no other cares in a distant country to distract your attention; and because you have no relations you are the less liable to the attacks of open or secret jealousy.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan then gave him a large sum of money in gold pieces, which Khaled gladly accepted, since he had not even wherewithal to buy himself a garment for the wedding feast, still less to distribute gifts to the courtiers and to the multitude. The Sultan also presented him with a black slave to attend to his personal wants.</p>
			<p>Khaled then sent for merchants from the bazaar, and they brought him all manner of rich stuffs, such as he needed. There came also two tailors, who sat down upon a matting in his apartment and immediately began to make him clothes, while the black slave sat beside them and watched them, lest they should steal any of the gold of the embroideries.</p>
			<p>When it was known in the palace that the Sultan’s only daughter was to be married at once, there were great rejoicings, and many camels were slaughtered and a great number of sheep, to supply food for so great a feast. A number of cooks were hired also to help those who belonged to the palace, for although the Sultan fed daily more than three hundred persons, guests, travellers, and poor, besides all the members of the household, yet this was as nothing compared with the multitude to be provided for on the present occasion.</p>
			<p>Then it was that Hadji Mohammed, the chief of the cooks, sat down upon the floor in the midst of the main kitchen and beat his breast and wept. For the confusion was great so that the voice of one man could not be heard for the diabolical screaming of the many, and the cooks smote the young lads who helped them, and these, running to escape from the blows, fell against the porters who came in from outside bearing sacks of sugar, and great baskets of fruit and quarters of meat and skins of water, and bushels of meal and a hundred other things equally necessary to the cooking; and the porters, staggering under their burdens, fell between the legs of the mules loaded with firewood, that had been brought to the gate, and the dumb beasts kicked violently in all directions, while the slaves who drove them struck them with their staves, and the mules began to run among the camels, and the camels, being terrified, rose from the ground and began to plunge and skip like young foals, while more porters and more mules and more slaves came on in multitudes to the door of the kitchen. And it was very hot, for it was noontide, and in summer, and there were flies without number, and the dogs that had been sleeping in the shade sprang up and barked loudly and bit whomsoever they could reach, and all the men bellowed together, so that the confusion was extreme.</p>
			<p>“Verily,” cried Hadji Mohammed, “this is not a kitchen but Yemamah, and I am not the chief of the cooks, but the chief of sinners and fuel for hell.” So he wept bitterly and beat his breast.</p>
			<p>But at last matters mended, for there were many who were willing to do well, so that when the time came Hadji Mohammed was able to serve an honourable feast to all, though the number of the guests was not less than two thousand.</p>
			<p>But Khaled, having visited the bath, arrayed himself magnificently and rode upon his bay mare to the mosque, surrounded by the courtiers and the chief officers of the state, and by a great throng of slaves from the palace. As he rode, he scattered gold pieces among the people from the bags which he carried, and all praised his liberality and swore by Allah that Zehowah was taking a very goodly husband. And as none knew whence he came, all were equally pleased, but most of all the Bedouins from the desert, of whom there were many at that time in Riad, who had come to keep the feast Bairam, for Khaled’s own words had been repeated, and they had heard that he came from the desert like themselves. And when he had finished his prayers, he rode back to the palace.</p>
			<p>When the time for the feast came the Sultan led Khaled into the great hall and made him sit at his right hand. The Sultan himself was magnificently dressed and covered with priceless jewels, so that he shone like the sun among all the rest. Then he presented Khaled to the assembly.</p>
			<p>“This,” said he, “is Khaled, my beloved son-in-law, the husband of my only daughter, whom it has pleased Allah to send me, as the stay of my old age and as the successor to my kingdom. He will be terrible in war as Khaled ibn Walid, his namesake, the Sword of the Lord, and gentle and just in peace as Abu Bakr of blessed memory. He is as brave as the lion, as strong as the camel, as swift as the ostrich, as sagacious as the fox and as generous as the pelican, who feeds her young with the blood of her own breast. Love him therefore, as you have loved me, for he is extremely worthy of affection, and hate his enemies and be faithful to him in the time of danger. By the blessing of Allah he shall rear up children to me in my old age, to be with you when he is gone.”</p>
			<p>Thereupon Khaled turned and answered, speaking modestly but with much dignity in his manner.</p>
			<p>“Ye men of Nejed, this is my marriage feast and I invite you all to be merry with me. Whether it shall please Allah to give me a long life, or whether it shall please him to take me this night I know not. We are in the hand of Allah. But this I do know. I will love you as my own people, seeing that I have no people of my own. I will fight for you as a man fights for his own soul, for his wife and for his children, and I will divide justly the spoils in war, and give in peace whatsoever I am able, to all those who are in need. I swear by Allah! You are all witnesses.”</p>
			<p>The courtiers and all the guests were much pleased with this short speech, for they saw that Khaled was a man of few words and not proud or overbearing, and none could look into his face and doubt his promise. For the present moment at least Zehowah’s prediction had been verified, for no one was jealous of him, and there was but one party among them all and that was for him. So they all feasted together in harmony until the sun was low.</p>
			<p>In the meantime Zehowah remained in the harem, surrounded by her women, and a separate meal was brought to them. They all sat upon the rich carpets leaning on cushions set against the walls, and small low tables were brought in, covered with dishes and bowls containing delicately prepared rice and mutton in great abundance and fresh blanket bread, hot from the stones, and olives brought from Syria. Afterwards came sweetmeats without number, such as Hadji Mohammed knew how to prepare, and gold and silver goblets filled with a drink made from large sweet lemons and water, which is called <i xml:lang="ar">treng</i>. Zehowah indeed ate sparingly, for she was accustomed to such dainties every day, but her women were delighted with the abundance and left nothing to be taken away.</p>
			<p>While they were eating six of the women played upon musical instruments by turns, while others danced slow and graceful measures, singing as they moved, and describing the unspeakable happiness which awaited their princess in marriage. Afterwards when the tables had been taken away and they had washed their hands with rose water from Ajjem, Zehowah commanded the singing and the dancing to cease, and the women brought her one by one the dresses which she was to wear before Khaled. They were very magnificent, for it had needed many years to prepare them, and a great weight of gold and silver threads had been weighed out to the tailors and embroiderers who had worked in the preparation of them ever since Zehowah had been two years old. For the piece of material is weighed first, and then the gold, and afterwards, when the work is finished, the whole is weighed together, lest the tailors should steal anything.</p>
			<p>But Zehowah looked coldly at the garments, one after the other, as they were brought and taken away, and the women fancied that she was to be married to the stranger against her will, and that she remembered the Indian prince.</p>
			<p>“It is a pity,” one of them ventured to say, “that the bridegroom has not brought any elephants with him, for we would have watched them from the balconies, since they are diverting beasts.”</p>
			<p>“And it is a pity,” said Zehowah scornfully, “that my husband has not a round, soft face, like the moon in May, and the eyes of a gazelle and the heart of a hare. Truly, such a one would have made you a good king, seeing that he was also an unbeliever!”</p>
			<p>“Nay,” said the woman humbly, “Allah forbid that I should make a comparison, or bring an ill omen on the day by speaking of that which chanced a year ago. Truly, I only spoke of elephants, and not of men. For, surely, we all said when we saw him in the court that he looked a brave warrior and a goodly man.”</p>
			<p>Then a messenger came from the Sultan saying that it was time to make ready. So they went to another apartment, where the nuptial chamber had been prepared. The Sultan came, then, leading Khaled, and followed by the Kadi, and all the women veiled themselves while the latter read the declaration of marriage. After that they all withdrew and Khaled took his seat upon the high couch in the middle of the room. Presently all the women returned, unveiled, with loud singing and playing of instruments, leading Zehowah dressed in the first of the dresses which she was to put on, and which, though it was very splendid, was of course the least magnificent of all those which had been prepared. But Khaled sat in his place looking on quietly, for he was acquainted with the custom, and he cared little for the rich garments, but looked always into Zehowah’s face.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
